Feat/ucp migration (#23)
SolidLabResearch/user-managed-access: packages/ucp/docs/getting-started.md

This tutorial is about how to install and use the [@solidlab/ucp](https://github.com/SolidLabResearch/user-managed-access/tree/main/packages/ucp) library utilities.

## Installing

As of today (2 Februari 2024), this package is not on npm.
Which means installing via `npm install @solidlab/ucp` does **not** work yet.

> However, it can still easily installed by adding `"@solidlab/ucp": "https://github.com/woutslabbinck/ucp-enforcement.git"` to your dependencies in package.json.

Reviewer: Updated to use GitPkg, so the installations keep up to date with the code in this repo.

```suggestion
However, it can still easily installed by adding `"@solidlab/ucp": "https://gitpkg.now.sh/SolidLabResearch/user-managed-access/packages/css?main"` to your dependencies in package.json, or executing the corresponding command of your favourite package manager, e.g. `yarn add @solidlab/ucp@"https://gitpkg.now.sh/SolidLabResearch/user-managed-access/packages/css?main"`.
```

If no package.json is yet present, you can just create a `package.json` file, copy the contents below and execute `npm i`

```json
{
    "dependencies": {
        "ucp-enforcement": "https://github.com/woutslabbinck/ucp-enforcement.git",
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: This seems trivial, so we could leave it out.

~~~suggestion
~~~

> ### Note for installing
> 
> Another options currently is to look at [GitPkg](https://gitpkg.now.sh/).

Reviewer: Integrated above, because I think it's better for people to keep track of the code as it evolves here.

```suggestion
```

## Using the library

> First, a brief reminder of what the goal is library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, a brief reminder of what the goal is of this library.
```

What this library gives is a set of tools for creating **usage control decision** engines that are fully customizable.
A **usage control decision** engine evaluates an *action request* against a set of *Usage Control Policies* to get a conclusion of *access grants*.

### Example

As an example, imagine that Ruben wants to know Wout his age.
The age of Wout can be found in a *resource*, `urn:wout:age` (a unique identifier), and is safeguarded by Wout his *policy* that says Ruben has read access to the *resource*. 

> Concretely, this policy could be modelled as a tuple (Requesting Party (RP), action, target resource, resource owner), which in this example would be (*urn:ruben*,*read access*, *urn:wout:age*,*urn:wout*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Concretely, this policy could be modelled as a tuple (Requesting Party (RP), action, target resource, resource owner), which in this example would be (`urn:ruben`, `urn:modes:read`, `urn:wout:age`, `urn:wout`).
```

> The **usage control decision** engine, would then be able to interpret both the request and the policy to give as conclusion a grant: *read access*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **usage control decision** engine, would then be able to interpret both the request and the policy to give as conclusion a grant: `urn:modes:read`. 
```

This means Ruben is able to know Wout his age and we know that the access is allowed conforming to the policies of Wout thanks to the engine.

Note: that this example does not contain any usage control yet, but is rather access control.
When a policy has additional to the current tuple expression and enforcement for e.g. Ruben has to delete the data after 30 days and/or that he can only use it for the purpose of for example buying a gift for Wout his Birthday, then we are talking about Usage Control.
Though, you could see the current use case as preventive usage control without purposes.

### High level Architecture

There are two functions implemented to calculate the grants, both are part of the interface `UconEnforcementDecision`.

> 1. `calculateAccessModes`: Calculate the *access grants* based on the set of *Usage Control Policies* , the *request* and how to *interpret the policies* (the algorithm)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `calculateAccessModes`: Calculate the *access grants* based on the set of *Usage Control Policies* , the *request* and how to *interpret the policies* (the algorithm).
```

2. `calculateAndExplainAccessModes`: The same as `calculateAccessModes`, but also provides an **Explanation** of how the *access grants* are calculated.

> Both functions have as input a `UconRequest`. This is an interface that formalizes the action request e.g. (RP, requested action, resource) (*urn:ruben*,*read access*, *urn:wout:age*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both functions have as input a `UconRequest`. This is an interface that formalizes the action request e.g. (RP, requested action, resource) (`urn:ruben`, `urn:modes:read`, `urn:wout:age`).
```

> As output, `calculateAccessModes` has a list of strings (`access grants`) and `calculateAndExplainAccessModes` has an `Explanation` (which will be elaborated later).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As output, `calculateAccessModes` has a list of strings (*access grants*) and `calculateAndExplainAccessModes` has an `Explanation` (which will be elaborated later).
```

Before this instantiation is given, an explanation of how it works is given in [the following section](#usage-control-decision-engine).

#### Usage Control Decision engine

The (`UcpPatternEnforcement`) engine has three components and can be consulted with the methods described in [the high level architecture](#high-level-architecture).

The three components:

- A **[storage](https://github.com/SolidLabResearch/user-managed-access/tree/main/packages/ucp/src/plugins)** to the set of *Usage Control Policies*
- A **storage** to the set of [Notation3](https://w3c.github.io/N3/spec/) (N3) [interpretation rules](https://github.com/SolidLabResearch/user-managed-access/tree/main/packages/ucp/rules)
- A configured instance of **[Koreografeye](https://github.com/eyereasoner/Koreografeye)** consisting of:
  - An **N3 reasoner** ([eye-js](https://github.com/eyereasoner/eye-js))
  - A [Koreografeye policy/plugin executor](https://github.com/SolidLabResearch/user-managed-access/blob/main/packages/ucp/src/PolicyExecutor.ts) + [plugins](https://github.com/SolidLabResearch/user-managed-access/tree/main/packages/ucp/src/plugins)

> When a method (e.g. `calculateAccessModes`) is then called with an `action request` the following steps are then executed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a method (e.g. `calculateAccessModes`) is then called with an *action request* the following steps are then executed:
```

```ts
const accessModes = await ucpEvaluator.calculateAccessModes({
    subject: "https://pod.rubendedecker.be/profile/card#me",
    action: ["http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#Read"],
    resource: "urn:wout:age",
    owner: "https://pod.woutslabbinck.com/profile/card#me"
});
console.log(accessModes);
```

Unfortunately, this results into an empty list `[]`. Which means no **grants** are given and thus Ruben cannot know the age of Wout.

The reason for this is very simple, there is **no** *Usage Control Policy* in the storage.

This can however be resolved by simply adding such a policy to the **Usage Control Rule Storage**:

```ts
@prefix odrl: <http://www.w3.org/ns/odrl/2/> .
@prefix : <http://example.org/usageControlRule> .

:permission
  a odrl:Permission ;
  odrl:action odrl:read ;
  odrl:target <urn:wout:age> ;
  odrl:assignee <https://pod.rubendedecker.be/profile/card#me> ;
  odrl:assigner <https://pod.woutslabbinck.com/profile/card#me> .
```

To add this rule to the storage, the following code can be used:

> ```ts
> const ucr = `@prefix odrl: <http://www.w3.org/ns/odrl/2/> .
> @prefix : <http://example.org/usageControlRule> .
> 
> :permission
>   a odrl:Permission ;
>   odrl:action odrl:read ;
>   odrl:target <urn:wout:age> ;
>   odrl:assignee <https://pod.rubendedecker.be/profile/card#me> ;
>   odrl:assigner <https://pod.woutslabbinck.com/profile/card#me> .
>     `

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```ts
const ucr = `
  @prefix odrl: <http://www.w3.org/ns/odrl/2/> .
  @prefix : <http://example.org/usageControlRule> .

  :permission
    a odrl:Permission ;
    odrl:action odrl:read ;
    odrl:target <urn:wout:age> ;
    odrl:assignee <https://pod.rubendedecker.be/profile/card#me> ;
    odrl:assigner <https://pod.woutslabbinck.com/profile/card#me> .
`;
```

const policyStore = await turtleStringToStore(ucr);
await uconRulesStorage.addRule(policyStore);
```

From now on, when the access modes are calculated again, the following grants are received:

```sh

> [ 'http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#Read' ]

Reviewer: Something that is not clear from these docs, is why you suddenly use ACL terminology, when you've been talking about ODRL.

Author: Good point, the reason for that is something we know: the goal for it was to be used in the CSS and the CSS understands these actions.

Do you have an idea how to incorporate that into the documentation?

Reviewer: I'm not entirely sure, since it is not fully clear to me how close we should bind ourselves to ODRL.

My current opinion is that we should not need to do a mapping at all. The Resource Server uses certain access modes (e.g. from the ACP vocabulary, or the CSS's own mapping thereof), and mentions those when registering the resource at the Authorization Server, so it feels only natural to express the policies at the AS also in terms of those modes: the AS will somehow present those to the Resource Owner, who will make policies based on them, and so it's these modes that will end up in stored policies. For ODRL policies, that would probably mean using those modes as `odrl:action`.

In the short-term, for this PR, however, it might suffice to mention that the N3 rules make a mapping from ODRL action vocabulary to the one of the RS. Note, for example, that the N3 rules used in the current config on `main` already use mocked CSS-specific URNs.

```

The full code sample for this example can be found in [appendix I](#appendix-I-Full-code-snippet)

### Temporal Policy engine

> TODO:

Reviewer: Either complete, comment out, or remove and add as an issue.

### Engine with explanation

First an elaboration is given for what is meant by explanation.

> Note: after implementation, similarities have been found with the idea of **ODRL Evaluator** from the [ODRL Formal Semantics Community Group](https://w3c.github.io/odrl/formal-semantics/).

Reviewer: Not sure if we should mention that here in the docs, if we're not going to elaborate on it.

Author: I'll comment it out, it's basically a reminder to myself.

#### Explanation

So what is the explanation exactly? It is an interface which contains four components:

> An **Explanation** consists of four components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An `Explanation` consists of four components:
```

// load N3 Rules from a directory 
const response = await fetch('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/woutslabbinck/ucp-enforcement/main/rules/log-usage-rule.n3'); // loading from the github repo
const n3Rules: string[] = [await response.text()]
// instantiate the enforcer using the policy executor,
const ucpPatternEnforcement = new UcpPatternEnforcement(uconRulesStorage, n3Rules, new EyeJsReasoner([
    "--quiet",
    "--nope",
    "--pass"]), policyExecutor)
```

Not that compared to the previous engines, a different **plugin** and a different **N3 interpretation rules** are used.
These allow for retrieving a proper explanation during the calculation of the requests.

Another difference is the fact that know the method `calculateAndExplainAccessModes` has to be used. 
Luckily, this still uses a `UconRequest` as input:

```ts
const explanation = await ucpEvaluator.calculateAndExplainAccessModes({
    subject: "https://pod.rubendedecker.be/profile/card#me",
    action: ["http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#Read"],
    resource: "urn:wout:age",
    owner: "https://pod.woutslabbinck.com/profile/card#me"
});
console.log(explanation);
```

> When a policy is added to the TODO: storage. This will print out a Javascript Object, which is not very nice.

Reviewer: Not sure what the "TODO" means here. Remove or resolve.

    const plugins = { "http://example.org/dataUsage": new UcpPlugin() }
    // Initialise koreografeye policy executor
    const policyExecutor = new PolicyExecutor(plugins)
    // Initialise Usage Control Rule Storage
    const uconRulesStorage = new MemoryUCRulesStorage();
    // load N3 Rules
    const response = await fetch('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/woutslabbinck/ucp-enforcement/main/rules/data-crud-rules.n3'); // loading from the github repo
    const n3Rules: string[] = [await response.text()]
    // instantiate the enforcer using the policy executor,
    const ucpEvaluator = new UcpPatternEnforcement(uconRulesStorage, n3Rules, new EyeJsReasoner([
            "--quiet",
            "--nope",
            "--pass"]), policyExecutor)
    
    // calculate grants based on a request
    const noAccessModes = await ucpEvaluator.calculateAccessModes({
    subject: "https://pod.rubendedecker.be/profile/card#me",
    action: ["http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#Read"],
    resource: "urn:wout:age",
    owner: "https://pod.woutslabbinck.com/profile/card#me"
    });
    console.log(noAccessModes);
    
    // add Usage Control Rule to Usage Control Rule Storage

>     const ucr = `@prefix odrl: <http://www.w3.org/ns/odrl/2/> .
> @prefix : <http://example.org/usageControlRule> .
> 
> :permission
>   a odrl:Permission ;
>   odrl:action odrl:read ;
>   odrl:target <urn:wout:age> ;
>   odrl:assignee <https://pod.rubendedecker.be/profile/card#me> ;
>   odrl:assigner <https://pod.woutslabbinck.com/profile/card#me> .
>     `

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    const ucr = `@prefix odrl: <http://www.w3.org/ns/odrl/2/> .
        @prefix : <http://example.org/usageControlRule> .

        :permission
            a odrl:Permission ;
            odrl:action odrl:read ;
            odrl:target <urn:wout:age> ;
            odrl:assignee <https://pod.rubendedecker.be/profile/card#me> ;
            odrl:assigner <https://pod.woutslabbinck.com/profile/card#me> .
    `;
```

    });
    console.log(accessModes);
}
main()
```

## appendix III: Full code snippet Explanation
```ts
import { PolicyExecutor, UcpPatternEnforcement, UCPLogPlugin, MemoryUCRulesStorage, explanationToRdf, serializeFullExplanation, turtleStringToStore } from "@solidlab/ucp";
import { EyeJsReasoner } from "koreografeye";

async function main() {
    // load plugin(s)
    const plugins = { "http://example.org/dataUsageLog": new UCPLogPlugin() }
    // instantiate koreografeye policy executor
    const policyExecutor = new PolicyExecutor(plugins)
    // ucon storage
    const uconRulesStorage = new MemoryUCRulesStorage()
    // load N3 Rules from a directory 
    const response = await fetch('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/woutslabbinck/ucp-enforcement/main/rules/log-usage-rule.n3'); // loading from the github repo
    const n3Rules: string[] = [await response.text()]
    // instantiate the enforcer using the policy executor,
    const ucpEvaluator = new UcpPatternEnforcement(uconRulesStorage, n3Rules, new EyeJsReasoner([
        "--quiet",
        "--nope",
        "--pass"]), policyExecutor)
    
    // add Usage Control Rule to Usage Control Rule Storage

>     const ucr = `@prefix odrl: <http://www.w3.org/ns/odrl/2/> .
> @prefix : <http://example.org/usageControlRule> .
> 
> :permission
>   a odrl:Permission ;
>   odrl:action odrl:read ;
>   odrl:target <urn:wout:age> ;
>   odrl:assignee <https://pod.rubendedecker.be/profile/card#me> ;
>   odrl:assigner <https://pod.woutslabbinck.com/profile/card#me> .
>     `

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    const ucr = `@prefix odrl: <http://www.w3.org/ns/odrl/2/> .
        @prefix : <http://example.org/usageControlRule> .

        :permission
            a odrl:Permission ;
            odrl:action odrl:read ;
            odrl:target <urn:wout:age> ;
            odrl:assignee <https://pod.rubendedecker.be/profile/card#me> ;
            odrl:assigner <https://pod.woutslabbinck.com/profile/card#me> .
    `;
```
